% Thesis Acknowledgements ------------------------------------------------


%\begin{acknowledgementslong} %uncommenting this line, gives a different acknowledgements heading
\begin{acknowledgements}      %this creates the heading for the acknowlegments


I would like to thank my supervisor Andrew W. Moore for his guidance and
support during my PhD and the significant patience he exhibitted over the years
of my PhD. In addition, I wish to express my gratitude to Richard Mortier,
Steve Uhlig, and Peter Newman for the internship opportunity they provided to
me in the University of Notingham, the TU-Berlin, and the SRI\@. I wish also to
thank Nadi Sarrar and Rob Sherwood for their help in \oflops, Dimos
Pediadiatakis for his fruitful input to \sdnsim and its descendents, and Narseo
Vallina-Rodriguez, Anil Madhavapeddy, Sebastian Probst Eide, Jon Crowcroft,
Heidi Howards, and Andrius Aucinas for their inputs in the design of \signpost.
Finally, I would like additionally to thank Simon Moore and Robert N. M. Watson
for the opportunities they provided me to work in the (MRC)$_2$ project during
my write up.

During my PhD years in Cambridge, I would like to express my gratitude to the
following people for their academic and social support: Christos Efstratiou,
George Parisis, Georgina Kalogeridou, Jury Audzevich, Gianni Antichi, Salvatore
Scelato, Ilias Leontiadis, Liam McNamara, Tasos Noulas, Ilias Marinos, Maria
Bakali.

I would also like to thank Elisavet Christou for her support and patience
during a difficult period of our life. Last but not least, I wish to thank my
family, Ioannis Rotsos and Olympia Lianoudaki-Rotsou, for their continuous
support and encouragement throughtout my life. This work is dedicated to
Elisavet and my parents. 

\end{acknowledgements}
%\end{acknowledgmentslong}

% ------------------------------------------------------------------------

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../thesis"
%%% End: 
